Cabernet Sauvignon
The archetypal big red wine, Cabernet Sauvignon in its most prized form comes from world-famous wine regions such as Bordeaux and the Napa Valley. But this widely planted grape also makes Cabernet wine in delicious variations and a variety of prices in other wine-producing regions around the world.

Cabernet Sauvignon grapes emerged from a spontaneous crossing of the red Cabernet Franc and the white Sauvignon Blanc grapes, appearing in Bordeaux some time before the 18th century, according to ""The Oxford Companion to Wine."

Tiny, thick-skinned grapes are behind Cabernet’s deep color and extracted flavors. In moderate climates, like Bordeaux, they make full-bodied wines with a great concentration of black fruit flavors, high acidity and considerable tannins. In Bordeaux, where Cabernet is a late-ripening variety, winemakers often blend it with earlier-ripening grapes, such as Merlot and Cabernet Franc, to achieve the right balance of acidity and flavor complexity. Cabernet Sauvignon dominates the wines of Bordeaux’s Left Bank, particularly in the world-famous appellations of Margaux, Pauillac, St.-Julien, St.-Estèphe and Graves.
In warmer climates like California, Cabernet grapes develop black cherry, blueberry and menthol flavors with medium acidity. The grapes can ripen more fully there, leading to wines with softer tannins, heavier fruit profiles and higher alcohol. In the United States, Cabernet is generally bottled as a varietal wine, though some winemakers emulate the Bordeaux style, blending the grape with Cabernet Franc and Merlot. You’ll occasionally see these blends classified as Meritage wines.

High-quality Cabernets are typically aged in French or American oak barrels. The wine’s rich flavors marry with oak to develop a wide range of complex tastes, including vanilla, toast, char, cedar, tobacco, cigar box, leather, chocolate, coffee, spice and more. Some lighter, less-expensive Cabernet Sauvignon wines may be unoaked, aged in older, neutral oak or aged with oak staves or chips.

Wine lovers can discover a range of Cabernet Sauvignon styles and fine examples all over the world. In Italy, Cabernet is a key grape in internationally styled Super Tuscan wines. Australian winemakers sometimes blend it with Shiraz, and South African producers make Cabernet Sauvignon as a varietal wine and use it in Bordeaux-styled blends. Winemakers also produce exceptional examples of Cabernet Sauvignon wines in Washington, Chile and Argentina.