Syrah/Shiraz
In France, where the grape has been cultivated since Roman times, it’s Syrah, appearing most frequently in wines from the Rhône region. In Australia, where it is thought to have been introduced in 1832, the nation’s signature grape is known as Shiraz.

Shiraz wine coming from Australia will typically have a New World flavor profile; reds labeled as Syrah wine (or with their French appellation, such as Hermitage, in the Northern Rhône) tend to reflect an Old World style. In other words, “The Oxford Companion to Wine” notes, when different regions grow the same varietal, “the resulting wines taste very different, with Australian versions tasting much sweeter and riper, more suggestive of chocolate than the pepper and spices often associated with Syrah in the Rhône.”
Syrah/Shiraz

Much of the difference between Syrah and Shiraz comes down to climate. In the Northern Rhône, the varietal makes big, rich wines with drying tannins and black fruit. Notably age-worthy, particularly in the regions of Hermitage and Côte Rôtie, Syrah develops secondary earthy flavors, such as tobacco. It is the only red grape used in the Northern Rhône that is sometimes blended with the white Viognier grape, which helps set the deep color of the wine.

In the Southern Rhône, Syrah is blended with Grenache, Mourvèdre and Cinsault to make Châteauneuf-du-Pape and other regional wines. While these wines still offer plenty of Syrah’s characteristic pepper and spice, the addition of Grenache typically reduces acidity and adds red fruit and higher alcohol to the blend. Aging Northern and Southern Rhône wines in oak adds complexity and vanilla, toast, leather and smoke flavors.

In the warmer Southern Hemisphere, and particularly Australia, Shiraz wine takes on a more intensely fruity profile, sometimes capturing herbal or minty qualities and chocolate notes. It is also frequently blended with Cabernet Sauvignon. Look for Australian Shiraz and Shiraz blends in both medium-bodied styles for everyday quaffing, and in more formidable and complex super-premium versions.

Elsewhere in the world, wines made from this noble grape may be labeled to reflect the winemaker’s intentions, indicating a New World or Old World style. California and, increasingly, Washington produce great examples of both Shiraz and Syrah wines, as does South Africa.