Chardonnay
Grown in cool climates, the variety delivers apple, pear and citrus fruit flavors and refreshing acidity. More moderate climates produce riper Chardonnay grapes with medium acidity and stone-fruit flavors. In warm regions, the typical Chardonnay taste is tropical, with pineapple and banana flavors, balanced with medium acidity.

In California, while an increasing number of winemakers offer unoaked or “naked” Chardonnays that more closely reflect Old World wine styles, most are dedicated to an oaky, New World style. The state’s many warm regions produce wines with high alcohol and full body, with cream, butterscotch, oak, peach and tropical fruit flavors. Cooler enclaves, such as Napa and Sonoma’s Carneros and Russian River Valley regions, deliver a more restrained Chardonnay.

Winemaking techniques add important secondary flavors to Chardonnay.

The popular buttery Chardonnay, the oaky Chardonnay with its devoted followers, is created by aging the wine with oak. This process adds body and flavors that can include butterscotch, vanilla, spice, nuts, toast and, of course, oak. Malolactic fermentation—a process that converts tart acids into softer, round ones—adds creamy flavor and body. Aging the wine on its lees (the yeast from fermentation) adds bready, yeasty notes.
Though it now grows in all the world’s major wine regions, Chardonnay’s original home is in Burgundy, in France. (Though they’re usually labeled by appellation, not variety, the most renowned white Burgundies are Chardonnay.) At the most northern end of Burgundy, French Chardonnay winemakers make cool-climate, dry Chardonnay in the village of Chablis, where the wines are unoaked, crisp and steely. Moving south, winemakers of the Côte d’Or make some of the most exquisite examples within world-famous appellations. In Grapes & Wines: A Comprehensive Guide to Varieties and Flavour, Oz Clarke and Margaret Rand offer helpful descriptions of the differing styles: “Montrachet is smoky and immensely concentrated; Meursault buttery and oatmealy; Puligny-Montrachet structured, savoury and tight; Chassagne-Montrachet nuttier, and Corton-Charlemagne rich yet minerally.”
Other fine examples are made in the Pacific Northwest, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Argentina, Chile and elsewhere. Most are dry, but some are off-dry with a hint of residual sugar.

Around the world Chardonnay is used in a wide range of sparkling wines, from light, crisp bubblies to big, yeasty mature versions. In Champagne, it’s blended with Pinot Noir and Pinot Meunier to make rich white and rosé sparkling wines, and it stands alone in exquisite Blanc de Blancs.